## Repeated expansion of gene families encoding phosphatases in the Hemiascomycete yeast

The specialization of _CgPMU2_ and _CgPMU3_, i.e. their preferencial response to phosphate vs thiamine starvation, highly resembles that of _ScPHO5_ and _ScPHO3_ in _S. cerevisiae_ (<span font="color:red">ref</span>) and yet, strikingly, the _PHO_ genes and the _PMU_ genes were evolutionarily unrelated. In other words, the gene family expansion and the subsequent transcriptional (Fig. 2) and functional (Fig. 4?) specialization among the phosphatase encoding genes ocurred _independently_ in these two species. This led us to hypothesize that such expansion and subfunctionalization of phosphatase-encoding genes has occurred repeatedly during the evolution of this group of diverse yeasts. 

To test this hypothesis, we initially focused on the _PHO_ gene family and investigated its evolutionary history of gene duplication among a group of four species spanning a wide range of evolutionary divergence. The prediction based on the hypothesis is that gene duplicaton events would have mostly occurred relatively recently, in multiple lineages post speciation. The relative timing of speciation and gene duplication can be inferred by comparing the species phylogeny with the gene (protein) sequence phylogeny. In a cartoon example with two paralogs in two extant species -- designate the two paralogs as A and B, and the two species as 1 and 2 -- if gene duplication preceded speciation, gene 1A and 2A would cluster before they are joined by the cluster of 1B and 2B (Fig. 3A). Conversely, if gene duplication occurred after speciation, 1A and 1B would coalesce first, and so would 2A and 2B, before the two clusters would coalesce (Fig. 3B). 

The maximum likelihood tree for _PHO5_ family genes in these species clearly supported independent origins of the _PHO_ genes in _S. pombe_, _K. lactis_ and the _sensu stricto_ clade, which includes _S. cerevisiae_ (Fig. 3C). Within the closely related _sensu stricto_ clade, which was estimated to have speciated in the past ~20 million years, the protein sequence divergence between homologs were at times too close for confident reconstruction of the phylogeny, as shown by the low bootstrap values in some of the internal nodes. Nonetheless, there is evidence for recent duplications, e.g. X and Y. The recent duplication of the _PHO_ genes within the _sensu stricto_ species is also supported by the syntenic relationships, e.g. for the genomic region that contains _PHO5_ and _PHO3_ arranged in tandem in _S. cerevisiae_, the syntenic region in _S. mikatae_ contains three genes instead, one of which, S.mik|2.235, appears to have no orthologs in other species, suggesting a recent origin in that species (Fig. S?). Similarly, _PHO11_ and _PHO12_ in _S. cerevisiae_ appear to have no syntenic orthologs in the other _sensu stricto_ species (_S. paradoxus_ was not included in the current version of Yeast Gene Order Browser). In conclusion, phylogenetic analysis revealed that the _PHO_ family has experienced recent and repeated duplication in multiple yeast species, some as recent as within the past 20 million years.
